WHO Technical Report Series 930 — JECFA 64th meeting (Rome, 8-17 Feb 2005), tin section.
Downloaded from iris.who.int 2026-10-08. Extracted with pdftotext -layout.

                       Explanation
                       Inorganic tin is found in food in the +2 and +4 oxidation states; it may
                       occur in cationic form (stannous and stannic compounds) or as anions
                       (stannites or stannates). Inorganic tin was evaluated by the Commit-
                       tee at its fourteenth, fifteenth, twenty-second, twenty-sixth, thirty-
                       third and fifty-fifth meetings (Annex 1, references 22, 26, 47, 59, 83
                       and 149). At its thirty-third meeting, the Committee converted the
                       previously established provisional maximum tolerable daily intake
                       (PMTDI) of 2 mg/kg of body weight to a provisional tolerable weekly
                       intake (PTWI) of 14 mg/kg of body weight. At these meetings, the
                       Committee reviewed data from short- and long-term dietary studies
                       and noted that inorganic tin compounds generally have low systemic
                       toxicity in animals because of limited absorption from the gastrointes-
                       tinal tract, low accumulation in tissues, and rapid passage through the
                       gastrointestinal tract. Insoluble tin compounds are less toxic than
                       soluble tin salts.
                       At its Thirty-first Session, CCFAC asked the Committee to review
                       information on the toxicity of inorganic tin in order to establish
                       an ARfD (23). At its fifty-fifth meeting (Annex 1, reference 149),
                       the Committee considered studies of the acute toxic effects seen after
                       consumption of foods containing high concentrations of inorganic
                       compounds of tin. It concluded that the acute toxicity of inorganic tin
                       in animals and humans, however, results from irritation of the mucosa
                       of the gastrointestinal tract, which may lead to vomiting, diarrhoea,
                       anorexia, depression, ataxia, and muscular weakness. There was
E                      no clear dose–response relationship, and the vehicle in which the

                 40




    Untitled-4                       40                                12/20/05, 19:53
             tin was administered may have affected its toxicity. The Committee
             concluded that insufficient data were available to establish an
             ARfD for inorganic tin. At that meeting, the PTWI previously
             established for compounds containing inorganic tin was not recon-
             sidered and was retained at its current value. The Committee did not
             consider studies on organic tin compounds, since it had concluded at
             its twenty-second meeting (Annex 1, reference 47) that these com-
             pounds, which differ considerably from inorganic tin compounds with
             respect to toxicity, should be considered separately.
             At its Thirty-fifth session, CCFAC (22) decided to ask the Committee
             to evaluate current levels of inorganic tin in “canned food other than
             beverages” and “canned beverages”, and to determine an ARfD,
             since new data would become available. At its Thirty-sixth session (8),
             CCFAC asked the Committee, when possible, to take population
             sensitivity into consideration when considering the new data and to
             assess the likelihood of the occurrence of effects at the proposed draft
             MLs (200 mg/kg in canned beverages and 250 mg/kg in canned foods
             other than beverages).

---- the committee's own doubt about the basis of the value ----

             posed standard for canned beverages (200 mg/kg) may lead to adverse
             reactions. No information was available as to whether there are sub-
             populations that are particularly sensitive for such adverse reactions.
             The Committee reiterated its advice that consumers should not store
             food and beverages in opened tinplated cans.
             In addition, the Committee noted that the basis for the PMTDI and
             PTWI established at its twenty-sixth and thirty-third meetings was
             unclear and these values may have been derived from intakes associ-
             ated with acute effects. The Committee concluded that it was desir-
             able to (re)assess the toxicokinetics and effects of inorganic tin after
             long-term exposure to dietary doses of inorganic tin at concentrations
             that did not elicit acute effects.
             An addendum to the toxicological monograph was prepared.


