WHO Food Additives Series 64, "Safety evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants",
CADMIUM (addendum), JECFA 73rd meeting (2010). Extracted with pdftotext -layout from the PDF
beside this file. Section 10 (Evaluation) is what establishes the PTMI.

the mean multiplied or divided by the maximum value. As the same maximum value
was used for both increased and reduced individual susceptibility, the adjustment
resulted in broadened distributions of both population variability and uncertainty
without affecting the geometric central estimates.

9.9.3 Toxicokinetic modelling
       A one-compartment model was used to characterize the relationship
between urinary cadmium concentration and dietary cadmium exposure (see
section 9.1 above). This model included a statistical parameter for variation in
apparent half-life. The calculated relationship between dietary cadmium exposure
and urinary cadmium concentration is linear; therefore, the outcome may be
expressed as population distribution of the ratio with confidence intervals (see
Figure 4 in section 8.3.5 above).

9.9.4 Estimating the relationship between urinary cadmium excretion and dietary
      cadmium exposure
       A two-dimensional Monte Carlo simulation was used to estimate the
population percentiles with associated 5th–95th percentile confidence intervals
from the variability and uncertainty in the breakpoint, the adjustment for
toxicodynamic variability and the toxicokinetic model (see Figure 5 in section 8.4
above). The dietary cadmium exposure (μg/kg bw per day) that equates to 5.24
(5th–95th percentiles 4.94–5.57) μg of cadmium per gram creatinine in urine was
estimated to be 1.2 (5th–95th percentiles 0.8–1.8) μg/kg bw per day at the 5th
population percentile. This is equivalent to 36 (5th–95th percentiles 24–54) μg/kg
bw per month. The Committee decided to use the lower bound of the confidence
interval to account for particularly susceptible individuals so that they would remain
below the dietary exposure at which renal pathology is indicated.

10.    EVALUATION
         Since cadmium was last considered by the Committee, there have been a
number of new epidemiological studies that have reported cadmium-related
biomarkers in urine following environmental exposure. The Committee noted that a
large meta-analysis of studies that measured the dose–response relationship
between ȕ2MG and cadmium excretion in urine was available. As the apparent half-
life of cadmium in human kidneys is about 15 years, steady state would be achieved
374                                                                  CADMIUM (addendum)

after 45–60 years of exposure. Therefore, data relating ȕ2MG excretion in urine to
cadmium excretion in urine for individuals who are 50 years of age and older
provided the most reliable basis on which to determine a critical concentration of
cadmium in the urine. An analysis of the group mean data from individuals who were
50 years of age and older showed that the urinary excretion of less than 5.24 (5th–
95th percentiles 4.94–5.57) μg of cadmium per gram creatinine was not associated
with an increased excretion of ȕ2MG. Higher urinary cadmium levels were
associated with a steep increase in ȕ2MG excretion.
       To determine a corresponding dietary exposure that would result in a urinary
cadmium concentration at the breakpoint of 5.24 (5th–95th percentiles 4.94–5.57)
μg of cadmium per gram creatinine, a one-compartment toxicokinetic model was
used. The lower bound of the 5th population percentile dietary cadmium exposure
that equates to the breakpoint was estimated to be 0.8 μg/kg bw per day or about
25 μg/kg bw per month.
       The Committee noted that the existing health-based guidance value for
cadmium was expressed on a weekly basis (PTWI), but, owing to cadmium’s
exceptionally long half-life, considered that a monthly value was more appropriate.
The PTWI of 7 μg/kg bw was therefore withdrawn.
       In view of the long half-life of cadmium, daily ingestion in food has a small or
even a negligible effect on overall exposure. In order to assess long- or short-term
risks to health due to cadmium exposure, total or average intake should be
assessed over months, and tolerable intake should be assessed over a period of at
least 1 month. To encourage this view, the Committee decided to express the
tolerable intake as a monthly value in the form of a PTMI. The PTMI established
was 25 μg/kg bw.
        The estimates of exposure to cadmium through the diet for all age groups,
including consumers with high exposure and subgroups with special dietary habits
(e.g. vegetarians), examined by the Committee at this meeting are below the PTMI.
