                             GUIDELINES FOR DRINKING-WATER QUALITY



Antimony
Elemental antimony forms very hard alloys with copper, lead and tin. Antimony com-
pounds have various therapeutic uses. Antimony is used in solders as a replacement
for lead, but there is little evidence of any significant contribution to drinking-water
concentrations from this source. Total exposure from environmental sources, food
and drinking-water is very low compared with occupational exposure.

Guideline value             0.02 mg/l (20 µg/l)
Occurrence                  Concentrations in groundwater less than 0.001 µg/l; concentrations in
                            surface water less than 0.2 µg/l; concentrations in drinking-water appear
                            to be less than 5 µg/l
Tolerable daily intake (TDI) 6 µg/kg body weight, based on a NOAEL of 6.0 mg/kg body weight per
                             day for decreased body weight gain and reduced food and water intake
                             in a 90-day study in which rats were administered potassium antimony
                             tartrate in drinking-water, using an uncertainty factor of 1000 (100 for
                             interspecies and intraspecies variation, 10 for the short duration of the
                             study)
Limit of detection          0.01 µg/l by electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS); 0.1–1
                            µg/l by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS); 0.8 µg/l
                            by graphite furnace AAS; 5 µg/l by hydride generation AAS
Treatment performance       Conventional treatment processes do not remove antimony. However,
                            antimony is not normally a raw water contaminant. As the most common
                            source of antimony in drinking-water appears to be dissolution from
                            metal plumbing and fittings, control of antimony from such sources
                            would be by product control.
Guideline value derivation
• allocation to water      10% of TDI
• weight                   60 kg adult
• consumption              2 litres/day
Assessment date             2003
Principal reference         WHO (2003) Antimony in drinking-water


     There has been a significant increase in the toxicity data available since the previ-
ous review, although much of it pertains to the intraperitoneal route of exposure. The
form of antimony in drinking-water is a key determinant of the toxicity, and it would
appear that antimony leached from antimony-containing materials would be in the
form of the antimony(V) oxo-anion, which is the less toxic form. The subchronic tox-
icity of antimony trioxide is lower than that of potassium antimony tartrate, which is
the most soluble form. Antimony trioxide, owing to its low bioavailability, is ­genotoxic
only in some in vitro tests, but not in vivo, whereas soluble antimony(III) salts exert
genotoxic effects in vitro and in vivo. Animal experiments from which the carcino-
genic potential of soluble or insoluble antimony compounds may be quantified are
not available. IARC has concluded that antimony trioxide is possibly carcinogenic to
humans (Group 2B) on the basis of an inhalation study in rats, but that antimony
trisulfide was not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3). However,


                                                  314
                                           12. CHEMICAL FACT SHEETS



chronic oral uptake of potassium antimony tartrate may not be associated with an
additional carcinogenic risk, as antimony after inhalation exposure was carcinogenic
only in the lung but not in other organs and is known to cause direct lung damage fol-
lowing chronic inhalation as a consequence of overload with insoluble particulates. Al-
though there is some evidence for the carcinogenicity of certain antimony c­ompounds
by inhalation, there are no data to indicate carcinogenicity by the oral route.

Arsenic1
Arsenic is found widely in Earth’s crust in oxidation states of –3, 0, +3 and +5, often as
sulfides or metal arsenides or arsenates. In water, it is mostly present as arsenate (+5),
but in anaerobic conditions, it is likely to be present as arsenite (+3). It is usually present
in natural waters at concentrations of less than 1–2 µg/l. However, in waters, particu-
larly groundwaters, where there are sulfide mineral deposits and sedimentary d­eposits
deriving from volcanic rocks, the concentrations can be significantly e­levated.
     Arsenic is found in the diet, particularly in fish and shellfish, in which it is found
mainly in the less toxic organic form. There are only limited data on the proportion of
inorganic arsenic in food, but these indicate that approximately 25% is present in the
inorganic form, depending on the type of food. Apart from occupational exposure,
the most important routes of exposure are through food and drinking-water, includ-
ing beverages that are made from drinking-water. Where the concentration of arsenic
in drinking-water is 10 µg/l or greater, this will be the dominant source of intake. In
circumstances where soups or similar dishes are a staple part of the diet, the drinking-
water contribution through preparation of food will be even greater.

Provisional guideline value 0.01 mg/l (10 µg/l)
                                  The guideline value is designated as provisional on the basis of
                                  treatment performance and analytical achievability.
Occurrence                        Levels in natural waters generally range between 1 and 2 µg/l, although
                                  concentrations may be elevated (up to 12 mg/l) in areas containing natural
                                  sources
Basis of guideline value          There remains considerable uncertainty over the actual risks at low
derivation                        concentrations, and available data on mode of action do not provide a
                                  biological basis for using either linear or non-linear extrapolation. In view
                                  of the practical difficulties in removing arsenic from drinking-water, as
                                  well as the practical quantification limit in the region of 1–10 µg/l, the
                                  guideline value of 10 µg/l is retained and designated as provisional.
Limit of detection                0.1 µg/l by ICP-MS; 2 µg/l by hydride generation AAS or flame AAS
Treatment performance             It is technically feasible to achieve arsenic concentrations of 5 µg/l or
                                  lower using any of several possible treatment methods. However, this
                                  requires careful process optimization and control, and a more reasonable
                                  expectation is that 10 µg/l should be achievable by conventional
                                  treatment (e.g. coagulation).



1
     s arsenic is one of the chemicals of greatest health concern in some natural waters, its chemical fact sheet
    A
    has been expanded.

                                                        315
